.TH YUA 1 "JULY 2014" "version 6"
.SH NAME
Yua \- Speedrun encoding tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B yua [\fRoptions\fB]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Yua
automates the conversion process of your speedruns footage.
The video material will be encoded to the SpeedDemosArchive (SDA)
quality standards. See the "GLOSSARY OF TERMS" section for an
explanation of SDA and video encoding specific terms.

.SH OPTIONS
Deinterlacing options are disabled on 32 bit builds.
.TP
\fB\-\-help / \-h
display usage information
.TP
\fB\-\-version / \-v
display program version number
.TP
\fB\-\-input\fR="/path/to/your/input.avi"
.TP
\fB\-\-append\fR="/path/to/additional/input.avi"
can be used multiple times
.TP
\fB\-\-output-basename
e.g.: \-\-output-basename="MyRun"
.br
_HQ, _IQ labels and .mp4 extension will be appended automatically
.TP
\fB\-\-output
output directory where the converted videos will be saved
.TP
\fB\-\-qualities
possible values: x i h m l
.br
e.g.: \-\-qualities=mh
.TP
\fB\-\-interlaced
.TP
\fB\-\-progressive
.TP
\fB\-\-f
e.g.: \-\-f1, \-\-f2, etc.
.TP
\fB\-\-d
e.g.: \-\-d4, \-\-d1
.TP
\fB\-\-2d
.TP
\fB\-\-3d
.TP
\fB\-\-mono
corresponds to "downmix to mono" option in the gui
.TP
\fB\-\-statid
.TP
\fB\-\-enables the statid checkbox
.TP
\fB\-\-statid\fR#
e.g.: \-\-statid1="My Name" \-\-statid2="Metroid Prime" \-\-statid3="Single-segment [0:49]"
.TP
\fB\-\-bff
bottom field first (for interlaced input)
.TP
\fB\-\-tff
top field first (for interlaced input)
.TP
\fB\-\-standard
force 4:3 aspect ratio
.TP
\fB\-\-widescreen
force 16:9 aspect ratio
.TP
\fB\-\-shutdown
shut down the computer when finished encoding
.TP
\fB\-\-trim
e.g.: \-\-trim=123,1099
.br
trims based on frame number (not including any statid)
.SS "interlaced d4 choices:"
.TP
\fB\-\-1-pixel-shift
.TP
\fB\-\-alternate-1-pixel-shift
.TP
\fB\-\-de-deflicker
.TP
\fB\-\-alternate-de-deflicker

.SH "GLOSSARY OF TERMS"
.TP
\fB2D, 3D
For our purposes, a heuristic for the presence of blinking.  It is much more
likely for a 2D game than a 3D game to have F1 blinking effects.  Low quality
versions of such games are encoded at F3 instead of F2 so that the blinking
is still apparent.
.TP
\fBAAC, AVC
Advanced Audio Codec and Advanced Video Codec.  Used in MP4 movies on SDA.
.TP
\fBAVI
A movie container format used in the past by SDA.
Contains DivX or XviD video and MP3 audio.
.TP
\fBAviSynth
A scripting tool/frame server for editing videos.
.TP
\fBBlinking
Before the 32-bit era, consoles had no ability to make sprites translucent (partially
transparent).  Games would try to replicate the effect by flashing the sprite visible
and invisible on alternating frames, or by doing similar things to produce other
effects.  Blinking is an issue when the frame rate is halved to F2 as the sprite
will then be constantly visible or invisible. See FDP, 2D, 3D.
.TP
\fBCapture
To record with a capture card.
.TP
\fBCodec
A way to compress video or audio.  If video was uncompressed, it would be far too
massive to transmit over the Internet; thus, it is compressed with a codec.
To be played back, it must be decoded with the same codec.
.TP
\fBD1, D4, etc
Video dimensions.  D1 (high resolution) in NTSC is 720x480 (DVD) or 640x480 (video file);
PAL D1 is 720x576 (DVD) or 704x576 (video file).  D4 (low resolution) in NTSC is 320x240;
PAL is 352x288.  D2 and D3 are only relevant to DVD output.
.TP
\fBDeinterlace
Movies on SDA use progressive scan, but most video captured from TV equipment
is interlaced.  Deinterlacing is the process to turn interlaced video into
progressive video.  If the whole video can be made by only discarding parts of
the video (LQ/MQ), the process is quick.  Otherwise (HQ/IQ) the video must be
analysed to recreate the missing parts of the picture, which is very slow.
.TP
\fBDivX
An older video codec.  Used in AVI movies.  Also see "XviD". 
.TP
\fBEncode
To compress with a codec.
.TP
\fBF1, F2, F3
Video framerates.  The number is the denominator of a fraction whose numerator is always 1.
Thus, F1 is full framerate, F2 is half framerate, and F3 is third framerate.
F1, F2 and F3 in NTSC are 59.94, 29.97 and 19.98 FPS, respectively, while in PAL they
are 50, 25 and 50/3 (~16.666667) FPS, respectively.
.TP
\fBFDP
Framerate Decimation Paradigm.  See 2D, 3D.
.TP
\fBField
An interlaced frame contains half the picture for each of two consecutive frames of video.
Each normal frame's share of the interlaced frame is called a field.
If the frame has 480 rows of pixels, the first field will be rows 1,3,5,...,479 and
the second field will be rows 2,4,6,...,480.  To separate fields means to take each
set of fields and put them in their own individual frames.
.TP
\fBField Blending
A cheap method of deinterlacing in which the two fields in a frame are blurred together.
Unacceptable for publication at SDA.
.TP
\fBFinalize
A process done on DVD recorders that allows discs to be used on other equipment.
Once you have finalized a disc, you cannot put anything else on it.
The exception is DVD-RW, which you must format in order to write to once it has
been finalized.  Finalization must be done on the DVD recorder that recorded the disc.
.TP
\fBFrame
Rather than using true motion, videos use frames, where slightly different images are
shown rapidly to create the illusion of motion. Each image is called a frame.
.TP
\fBFramerate
The rate at which frames are displayed.  This is written as "x FPS," where x is the
number of frames displayed each second.
.TP
\fBH.264
An advanced video codec (AVC).  Used in MP4 movies on SDA.
.TP
\fBHQ
High quality.  2Mb/s video, 128Kb/s audio, D1, F1
.TP
\fBIQ
Insane quality.  5Mb/s video, up to 320Kb/s audio, up to 1368x768, F1
.TP
\fBInterlaced
When a video signal comes one field at a time - to produce two frames "laced" together
into one - it is said to be interlaced.  Interlacing is used in TV video to halve
the amount of bandwidth used in the video signal, while only slightly harming the
viewing experience.  Also see "Field".
.TP
\fBLQ
Low quality.  128Kb/s video, 64Kb/s audio, D4, F2/3
.TP
\fBMQ
Medium quality (same as normal quality).  512Kb/s video, 64Kb/s audio, D1/4, F1/2/3
.TP
\fBMP3
An audio codec.  Used in AVI movies on SDA in the past.
.TP
\fBMP4
SDA's current video container format.  Currently contains H.264 video and AAC audio.
.TP
\fBMP4Box
A command-line application for working with MP4 files.  Yua uses it to mux together
the video and audio, but it has a lot of uses (e.g. splitting movies into 10-minute chunks
for YouTube).
.TP
\fBnate
The person who handles capturing and encoding runs for SDA, as well as
many other very important tasks.  He's also the author of Yua.
.TP
\fBNMF
New Master File.  Refers to an intermediate source video file in the encoding process,
usually one saved after deinterlacing (to avoid slow deinterlacing during each pass for
each quality of output, and to allow it to use multiple CPU cores).  To maintain the video
quality of the source video, the compression (if any) is lossless, meaning the NMF
has a very, very high bitrate.
.TP
\fBNQ
Normal quality (same as medium quality).
.TP
\fBProgressive Scan
When a video signal comes whole frames at once, it is said to be progressive scan.
.TP
\fBStatID
Station ID.  A title card appearing before and after a video posted on SDA that contains
the SDA logo, the runner's name, the game, type of run and official time.
It is exactly 5 seconds long.
.TP
\fBTranscode
To convert from one file format to another.  Similar to "Encode", except the source
is usually already encoded.
.TP
\fBx264
The implementation of H.264 used by SDA.
.TP
\fBXQ
X-TREME quality.  10Mb/s video, up to 320Kb/s audio, any resolution, F1.
.TP
\fBXviD
DivX spelled backwards.  Xvid is open source and generally produces better quality
video than DivX while remaining fully compatible.  Used in AVI movies on SDA in the past.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
Main site: \fIhttp://www.speeddemosarchive.com\fR
.br
Wiki:	 \fIhttps://kb.speeddemosarchive.com\fR
.br
Forums:	 \fIhttps://forum.speeddemosarchive.com

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2014 Taiga Software LLC

Your use of this software is governed by the terms of the GPL version 2
or, at your option, any later version.

AviSynth timebase reduction code by RAYMOD2 and IanB

AviSynth 3.0 high quality yv12 deinterlacing code by Manao

